PESACH 2020 (5780)


Editor’s Page


Dear Family


When people look at this year’s Pesach Book, it immediately becomes obvious that this
year is significantly different then in the past and hopefully in the future. I think it is fair to
say that Klal Yisrael is basically confined to their houses and the vast majority are
having smaller Sederim than in the past and for many, this is the first year they have
actually made a Seder at home. It has taken a miniscule virus to remove most of us
from the world as we know it. For some this is an extreme hardship, especially if they
live in a small apartment with a large family and for others, that are more fortunate, the
living space is comfortable and with modern technology, we are able to have productive
days, albeit not physically out in the world.
Since we will not be physically together, Bubby and I want you to know how much we
love all of you and how much you mean to us. Baruch Hashem, our family has grown
significantly over the years, and as you know, this would have been the first year where
the Denver Clan would not have been with us. Little did we think that we would all be
separated. Be that as it may, we are proud of all of you and even though Bubby and I
will celebrate on our own, you should know that you will be with us in spirit and we will
imagine everyone sitting around our table as we read through the Haggadah.
May Hashem grant the world a speedy recovery, after which may we all learn how to
live better together and enjoy this magnificent world which He has created for us. May
we live in Peace with our neighbors and may we speedily see the coming of Moshiach!


Chag Kasher V’Samayach!


Sabbah


Addendum: Important Note to ALL family members!!! I do not want anyone to feel that
because of the separation, you will not be receiving AFIKOMEN presents. Have no fear.
I have it on good authority (ME) that in each household having their own seder, the
leader of that seder will be supplying beautiful presents for all the attendees. Yasher
koach to you all.


Alte Bubby Gazette 2020


Tzfat


Ma Nishtana.
This year has been pretty different for us Tzfat Loewenthals.
Last year, we traveled the country searching for an amazing high school for Ashira. She
chose Halleli, which is a 4+hour train and bus ride from Tzfat.
This year, on Sunday mornings we would drive Ashira to Karmiel which is about 40 min
away. Then she would take a train. Then she would switch trains. Then sometimes she
would have to switch trains again. Then she would take a bus to the stop near her
school. Then she would walk 15-20 minutes with her rolling suitcase to her dorm room.
But it was worth it.
Halleli has a wonderful caring Minahelet (Principle) who, like Ashira, is a dancer. Ashira
has an amazing and loving Dorm Mother Adi, and a Bat Sherut, Chana who is a
fantastic, fun, supportive confidant, friend and mentor. I thank them all for being there
for Ashira when I am not physically with her. But I am, almost always with her... on the
phone! (And in her heart.) It's a good thing we don't have to pay per minute.
Having Ashira home now for a few weeks has been a relief after so many months of
traveling and being away but I think after Pesach Ashira's going to be ready to go back
to school and dancing... We'll have to see when that happens.
So with Ashira's school search ended, we began a school search for Hillel. Hopefully,
this time next year I'll be able to tell you that he's in a new school, it's been AMAZING
for him and he's thriving.
In the meantime, Hillel is working hard (or is that hardly working🤔)... working hard
preparing for his Bar Mitzva. He also has gotten really into his hiking/survival classes.
They go on weekly hikes and then about once a month they go on an overnight hiking
camping trip. They carry all their supplies on their backs and build their own shelter. The
first overnight was in the winter when there was a giant storm and they slept out in the
howling wind and rain. I woke up in the middle of the night from the thunder and couldn't
fall back asleep from worry, but he had a great time!


Something new for Ohevya is he began learning Gemara this year. It is a joy and
pleasure to hear him to review with Avraham what he's been learning. He's also working
hard (and having fun) in his karate classes, and learning English with Ima. He enjoys
building and going on Lego adventures. And most of all, he loves to play with and care
for the newest member of our family...
Super Pickle our bunny 😀 who gives joy and occasionally more excitement than you'd
think a rabbit could.
Avraham met with a lot of groups this year until Purim. Now all the groups have stopped
and we wonder when, be’ezrat Hashem, they will begin again. Avraham’s third book
came out this year. It is a translation of Peticha, an important book of Kabbalah by the
Baal HaSulam. He also just recently started writing subtitles for short videos of Rebbe
Gottlieb teaching Kabbalah, translating what the Rebbe is saying into English.
Rebecca is still managing the kids, their schooling and well being –wherever they may
be, helping Avraham with the gallery and occasionally making lovely jewelled creations.
That's the news from Tzfat. We hope that next year we are once again all together for
Pesach, this time in Yerushalayim having the greatest Pesach Geulah Seder ever!


Denver


It is wonderful having all of the kids home again. They are all getting used to learning
on line and living together. They are all very helpful around the house as Chaim is pretty
useless these days. It’s great having so many chefs; it’s like going to a different
restaurant every day!
Emma is/was enjoying her new Montessori school. They have a rabbit, 2 doves and a
turtle in the classroom. Emma also enjoys caring for the neighbors 8 chickens and they
have even allowed her to call Chief her own. She is now pining for a horse. Or at least a
goat!
Ellie was finally adjusting to Israel just when it was time to come home. After a couple
weeks at home, she is looking forward to going back to Israel next year. In the
meantime, she is following the DAT online curriculum as most of her Israeli classes are
in the middle of the night. Ellie is also now an employee of BrightStar as she acts as my
secretary for a little while each day.


Daina is adjusting to her first year at Stern and is taking too many classes to count.
She’s even in a class with Donny Posner’s daughter! She’s definitely a real college
student because she wants to eat pizza all day every day. Daina came home as a surprise
for Purim only to discover that the surprise was on her! Chaim shattered his leg the day
before her arrival and now Daina was thrown into the role of second Mother taking care
of Emma while Bara was taking care of Chaim. Especially when Chaim was in the
hospital for 4 days, Daina really rose to the challenge and held everything together. We
couldn’t have done it without her! We’re already treating Zaelig as a member of the
family (quarantine wise) as Daina enlisted him to help as well.
Matanya is/was enjoying his Junior year at Maryland. He is working part-time at REI
primarily for the employee discounts. He got a job for the summer at a small tech start
up in Israel. Hopefully this virus will be under control by then. Matanya has also been
very helpful since he arrived after his Appalachian adventure (see his entry for more
details).


Tel Mond
Who can believe that another year has passed?!
Ilana finished her year of learning and enjoyed it immensely. She then made the switch
from being a civilian to being a soldier and joined a great group that fdfsdfgsf s f gsf
dgss dfgfdsgfdgsfgsfgsdggggggfdgadfafdgafdgd Afterwards,
adsfdsgafdgafdgfdghlkjgafdafdhgl and fd sdfgs fdgs sdfg fdggfd sdfgsdfg
gafdghlfhgkjargea but only when ladgf hfdl sdfgjk ghsk jbhjkfhghjklsfghsfdhshd. All in
all, she is thrilled! (But do be careful, as she now knows how to shoot a very large
gun....)
Mordechai is working hard to finish 12


th grade. He completed his Alpha project and
won a national award for the best project in Chemistry (see one of the photos in our
family collage entry). He also put a lot of time into senior year activities around
Purim-time, which transformed the school for all the grades to enjoy. He is now busy
choosing a yeshiva for next year as well as going through the interview process for the
army. Mordechai has also been teaching himself to program and has been working on
some cool projects together with Aharon.
Aharon’s experience in 10


th grade has been a mixed bag, but he does have a few
teachers and subjects which he enjoys. In his spare time he has become a rather
accomplished climber and regularly goes both with Moshe and with friends. Aharon
has worked on his Photoshop skills and has created some amazing pieces. He is also


becoming quite adept at programming different types of games on the computer and
has learned a lot in the process – hopefully we can enjoy his and Mordechai's successes
as we play Acquire together over chag from the comfort of our locked-down homes.
Avigayil is now in 5


th grade and is beloved by all her teachers! She really excels in math
and loves being able to help out her classmates. She has become an avid reader in both
Hebrew and English and can often be found with a book in her hand. She’s also quite a
capable architect and interior designer, at least within the world of Minecraft. Avi has
grown so much this year that she now fits into Ilana's bat mitzvah dress and will be the
fanciest one at our seder table!
Moshe's work has sent him visiting more countries this year than ever before (although
it looks like travel will be off for a while now...). He also had the “opportunity” to build a
new team twice, which really kept him on his toes. While he still really enjoys climbing,
he has been a bit outstripped by his pipsqueak son (who isn't such a pipsqueak
anymore!).
I've had two of my largest groups ever at my science chug which has made for some
very lively classes! Loops business continues to keep me busy, and I even finished my
first parochet (something to keep me busy with all this time at home!).
Moshe wasn’t the only one who got to travel this year. We had a great family
adventure over the summer at Lake George in Upstate NY where we were joined by
Sima, Judith, and Judith’s adorable kids. We enjoyed hiking, kayaking, and singing
around the campfire. Moshe also arranged for me to join him on the tail end of a
business trip, and we had a wonderful ski trip in Norway. It was pretty funny to see us
up on skis again after so many years!
We are very thankful for all the blessings we've had this year, and we pray for
worldwide health. We miss you all and are eager to be able to celebrate again together
in person!
Happy Pesach!
Love,
Lisa


A nice thought from Rabbi Benjamin Blech submitted by Sabbah
Coronavirus​ is now officially a global pandemic. Suddenly we find ourselves smitten by
a plague of biblical severity.
Passover asks us to remember the 10 plagues which God sent against the Egyptians.
With the help of the Bible we know the purpose behind these afflictions of a people. God
had a plan. Egyptian suffering had meaning. What makes our contemporary anguish so
particularly unbearable is its seeming incomprehensibility.
In the age of the prophets there would’ve been an effort to discern some divine
message in this global tragedy. But today we somehow assume that scientific
knowledge precludes the possibility for including God as part of the management of the
universe. After all who can argue with Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch who, in the latter
half of the 19​th​ century, proved the germ theory of disease – that pathogens too small
to see without magnification are the true cause of illness. Germs are the villains and
viruses are the sole reasons for the presence of diseases which determine whether we
live or die.
And I dare to ask: Doesn’t belief in God demand that we merge the germ theory of
disease with the conviction of faith in a supreme being who actually decides where,
when and how far viruses spread?
Please understand exactly what I’m saying. Maimonides long ago made clear that it is
our obligation to ensure our good health. We can’t simply rely on God; God has made us
his partners in our quest for longevity. Hygiene is a mitzvah; it's an obligation. Taking
care of our bodies is a spiritual requirement akin to protecting our souls. When we are
directed by doctors to wash our hands we are required to do so by Torah law.
But the ultimate decision of life or death remains, as we make clear every year on Rosh
Hashanah and Yom Kippur when our fate is sealed, with the Almighty.
That is why I’m amazed that of the countless suggestions for how to counter and to
cope with the coronavirus we hear so little of the word God and the possibility that this
global pandemic brings with it a profound divine message.
I am obviously no prophet, but here is a thought that I think is worth considering and
taking to heart. Every parent knows that one of the most obvious responses to a child’s
misbehavior is what is commonly known as a “timeout.” The child is restricted from
enjoying pleasurable activities. The child has his normal life disrupted. The child is
encouraged to reflect upon his disobedience. Is it too much to consider that as our


world continues to sink ever lower in our commitment to virtue that God responded with
a virus that has forced millions into a “timeout” of quarantine and seclusion?
The 10 Commandments are the biblical source of the most basic system of ethical and
moral behavior. They represent the primary justification for our continued existence on
earth. And the commentators took note of a remarkable number. In the original Hebrew,
the language in which the commandments were inscribed by God on the two tablets,
there are exactly 620 letters.
620 would seem to be a number with no particular theological significance. It would’ve
been perfect and readily comprehensible if there were exactly 613 letters in the 10
Commandments. Those are the numbers of mitzvot given to the Jewish people in the
Torah. The 10 Commandments are the principles inherent in all of Jewish law. But what
is the meaning of 620 letters? The rabbis explained. While the number of mitzvot for
Jews is 613, the number seven represents universal law – what is commonly referred to
as the seven laws of the descendants of Noah, required as a minimum for all of
mankind. And 620 of course is the sum of 613 and seven, the totality of divine guidance
for both Jews as well as the rest of the world.
The commentary does not end there. 620 is the ​gematria​, the numerical value, of an
important Hebrew word, ​keter, ​which means crown. A ​keter – ​a crown – is placed on top
of every Torah scroll. The symbolism is obvious. The crown above the Torah
demonstrates the relationship of the 10 Commandments to the rest of the Torah. From
the 10 – in number of letters 620 – we have the principles which subsequently found
expression in the entirety of the Torah.
The ​keter – ​the crown – is the most powerful symbol of our connection with God.
The word corona – as in ​coronavirus​ – comes from the Latin word for crown.
Perhaps we need to consider the world’s present affliction not just in the context of a
disease caused by pathogens but as a divine message reminding us that we have been
given our lives to invest them with meaning and virtue as defined by God's 10
Commandments.


submitted by Bubby


I can never understand why on Pesach one can change utensils
from dairy to meat while it is forbidden at any other time of
the year.


And why when the women are so exhausted after all the preparation for Pesach
and the Seder they are obligated to do all the mitzvot of the Seder when they are
permitted to be more lenient when it comes to other mitzvot.
Yes, I know they have benefitted from the Redemption
no less than the men and they played a key role in our
liberation, however, they benefit from other blessings
without being obligated the same as men


The Light of Pesach


I recently found the following in the holy book Meor Einayim by Rebbe Menachem Nachum of
Chernobyl, a student of the Baal Shem Tov. It feels particularly relevant to Pesach this year.
Here is a rough translation:
Pesach is the right arm (revealed goodness) meaning that on Pesach God’s light of love is
revealed in the world. The entire year receives life force from this divine light drawn forth on
Pesach through the seder and the other things we do on Pesach. The Sages say that the produce
and food and the entire world is nourished through God’s great kindness on Pesach and this is
why Yitzchak (the left arm — hiddenness) is born on Pesach. Although the truth is that on
Pesach God’s goodness flows to the entire year, we see things that don’t seem to be God’s
goodness. This is because God’s goodness is in hidden in these situations. This is like the Sages
say that the Shechina, the divine presence, accompanies a sick person. That God’s glory is
present in all the world and all the world is filled with God’s glory. This is what it means that
Yitzchak (the hiddenness) is born on Pesach — that all the hiddenness of God’s goodness that
we experience throughout the year is with Pesach, meaning that the goodness is hidden within it.
That the goodness is even hidden in the sick person and it is that goodness that is the healing.
And this is what it means that in Nisan we were redeemed and in Nisan we will be redeemed.
Because at the crossing of the sea it was asked why Israel was redeemed since both Israel and the
Egyptians were worshiping idols — so it is difficult to understand why specifically Israel was
redeemed. But the reason is because Israel made the seder in Egypt like we do today, telling of
how we were redeemed even before we were redeemed because we believed that we were sure to
be brought out. In this divine light that was drawn down, Israel was redeemed and in Nisan we
will be redeemed. There is a general exile and also a personal exile, meaning the sufferings that
each of us go through. And is is from this same divine light drawn forth in Nisan that we will in
the future be redeemed.
May we be blessed to feel God’s infinite blessings in what we are all personally, nationally and
globally going through. Although we are all physically distant this year, may we be in our hearts
all closer than ever. As we are going through the contractions of the birthing of Mashiach, may
we soon be celebrating the Geulah of Israel and the entire world together.
So much love to everyone.
Avraham


Sanzer Rebbe: Anger and Tension in the home is worse than Chametz
The following are remarks by Klauseberg-Sanzer Rebbe in Netanya, Admor Tzvi
Elimelech Halberstam shlita
MARCH 2020
Below is an excerpt.
"We must especially refrain from finding fault during a time when we are supposed to
awaken Heavenly mercy. G-d forbid, we should not arouse negative judgment against
the Jewish people. We should only speak in their defense.
Instead, at such a time, everyone should look at themselves: What can I improve about
myself and my Avodah for me and all of Klal Yisrael? Let them look at where they can
improve in Torah, Tefillah, and, most of all, in the way they treat other people.
People are frightened and stressed, and naturally, they feel pressured and may tend to
lose patience at home and outside. In this situation, when the children are at home –
everyone is at home – along with the pressure of Pesach and all its preparations, which
yields its own stresses, the primary behavior that we must accept upon ourselves is to
be joyful and filled with Simcha. To exude calm, to be peaceful with the children, to
spend time with the children – the boys and the girls – even more than usual.
I must state – and this is the primary message I want to get across – that although
righteous women have been accustomed to devoting all their energy to preparing the
house for Passover, this year must be different. I have a tradition that I received many
times from my sainted father ל“זצ, that Pesach was not intended for making the house
new once again or to do “spring cleaning” of all kinds of dirt that may have accumulated.
What is required for Pesach is only removing chametz, and according to halacha,
nullification [i.e., Kol Chamira] is sufficient. In fact, my father recounted that in the home
of his grandfather – the Bnei Yissachar – they would clean the house on the night
before Pesach as they searched for chametz, and that was the entirety of the “Pesach
cleaning.”
Furthermore, my father himself instructed his children when they had small children of
their own to take care of that the mothers shouldn’t go beyond the basic obligation of
cleaning at the expense of caring for the children and should not turn the house over to
make it clean.


The evil inclination is ready to bring into your home pressure, stress, and irritation about
the children – and to cause tension between husband and wife – trying to convince
them that “this is necessary in order to make Pesach.” One needs to know that one
point of anger – one moment of stress – is far worse than having chametz in the home!
It is our duty – that of parents and righteous women – to ensure calm in the home.
Pesach will be kosher with doing less. Do as much as you can calmly with no stress –
and nothing more.".
Submitted by Rebecca


One of Bara’s favorite lines of mine from my ski accident is, “I really thought I had it!” It is
probably a line said by many people “after the fact” as they lie recovering in the hospital. In any
event, I am glad to be home with so many wonderful family caretakers. They are very happy,
though, that I am becoming more and more independent every day.
Now that I have more than a kzayit of metal in my leg, I’ve been wondering how to kasher it for
Pesach. I did some googling and found that everyone considers the metal chametz as the blood
that touches it is chametz based. The easiest solution is to sell the metal (some suggest selling the
whole leg). The only issue is that I would not be able to use my leg on Pesach. While that may
not be a problem this year as I am not supposed to use it anyway, I am not sure I want to keep the
crutches around for future years. Failure to kasher or sell the metal of course means that the
metal cannot be used even after Pesach and the leg should be removed so that the yetzer hara
cannot tempt you. There are a few different opinions on how to kasher it:
The most machmir opinion comes from Rav Donteventhinkaboutit. He holds that the only way to
kasher it is with a blowtorch. For $50 he will come to your house with his blowtorch and “take
care of it.”
Another opinion is from Rav Letsnotgetcarriedaway. He feels that as long as the metal did not
come from a recycled oven, it is sufficient to dip the leg in boiling water for a few seconds.
As I wasn’t thrilled with these answers, I went to the Chovevei website and chatted with
someone on their “Need Another Answer” page. They felt that since my blood is under 100
degrees, it would be sufficient to drink 26 sips of hot, kosher for Pesach chicken soup after
finishing with chametz on erev Pesach. The matza ball should only be eaten if absolutely
necessary. I think I’ll do that one.


Chag Sameach!
Chaim


How to Make Pesach in Lockdown Feel Like Ramot


We are all very upset that we cannot spend Pesach together this year. It will be a very
different Pesach for all of us as we celebrate it in lockdown, confined to our houses and
our immediate family members. In an effort to bring some of the regular cheer into our
chag, we came up with some ideas on how to adapt some of our regular events to our
current situation in order to make the holiday feel a little more normal. So, without
further ado, here are some suggestions on how to bring our normal Pesach experience
into our homes:
● The night before Pesach, the Denver crowd should stay up all night to ensure
that they are thoroughly exhausted by the time seder rolls around. The Israel
families should busy themselves with cooking, cleaning, and packing. Also make
sure to stock up on cheese sticks, pickles, and seaweed!
● We will each have our own take on seder this year – hopefully when we
celebrate together next year, we will have some interesting new ideas to share
on what went well and what we can incorporate into our group seder!
● Motzei chag, get the matzah brei cooking! Whatever the recipe says about
serving size, double it per the number of people in your house.
● Also, pack up all the Pesach dishes (although you'll have to upack them again for
use the rest of the week).
● The next morning, get up early to run around the house packing suitcases again.
● Put suitcases and a large supple of potato chips in the car. Get everyone in the
car and sit there for 2-4 hours (you get to decide how much traffic we hit this
year!).
◦ Optional: Print out a large picture of roadside scenery to tape onto the
windshield.
● While in the car, check in often via Whatsapp or phone calls with Bubby and
Sabbah to let them know how far along you are.


Now that we've made it to “Ramot”, here are some suggestions for chol hamoed
activities:
● Each morning, sit together at the breakfast table for approximately 1 1⁄2 hours
trying to decide what the day's activity should be.
● Once it's decided, pick a meet-up time and send everyone to their room to
change into appropriate clothing. Don't forget to grab some hard boiled eggs,


matzah, butter, dried and fresh fruit, and yogurts for lunch.
● When each person is ready, they should sit outside on the front steps to wait for
everyone else. As more people arrive, someone should run back into the house
for a forgotten hat/sunglasses and/or a bathroom stop. Those who are still
waiting should apply sunscreen.
● Realize that someone forgot to bring water shoes and add in a short delay.
● Once everyone is assembled, spend ten minutes deciding who will ride with
whom. In the case that you only have one car, you can decide who gets to sit in
which seat.
● Sit in the car for 30 minutes to 1 hour.
● Upon “arrival”, exit the car and get backpacks. Walk around backyard for the
desired amount of time stopping to take pictures of flowers, wildlife, and each
other at each scenic spot. If this was a water hike, turn on sprinklers during hike.
● Stop at some point under a tree to eat food taken from breakfast.
● At end of hike, treat everyone to some ice cream. Pickles can optionally be
added as well.
● If it was decided that this was a pool day, meet up at the pool. If you aren't so
lucky as to have a pool at home, either fill an old baby pool or your bathtub.
Bring goggles. Make sure someone forgets goggles.
● At lunchtime on a pool day, decide whether you want milchig or fleishig. The
milchig diners should decide what they want, sit at the kitchen table waiting for
approximately 45 minutes, and then make themselves lunch. Fleishig diners can
eat right away, but should eat outside.
● For at least one dinner, have a BBQ night. Make sure to produce lots of smoke.
● For night activities, make sure to put on appropriate clothing and sufficient bug
spray. You can choose from the following events:
◦ Drum circle: Sit outside with upside down buckets.
◦ Bonfire: Make a bonfire in your backyard and throw in some tinfoil wrapped
potatoes. Sing kumsitz songs while you wait.
◦ Sing-a-long: Make a list of some oldies-but-goodies.
◦ Magic show: Have one person think of somewhere they'd like to be and guess


what they are thinking (correct answer: Ramot!).
◦ Family Game Night (preferably not Avalon...): Pull chairs into a circle in the
hallway and keep shushing everyone so as not to wake the neighbors.
● Make sure to hang some blinking lights in the trees in your garden (maybe
something you have from Sukkot?) so that you can look out at the lights each
evening.
● Make sure to have a decent WiFi connection only available in the living room and
master bedroom.
● At least once during chag, play a game of Acquire (thanks to the programmers
who are working hard to make this happen!).
● Have ready a box of sporting equipment and another box with arts and crafts
supplies.
● Don't forget to celebrate Sabbah's birthday!
● Send in questions for a family Kahoot challenge.
● Erev last night of chag, get dressed up and meet outside for a family photo.
● Chag afternoon, prepare a short gymnastics show.
● Motzei chag, pack suitcases again and spend approximately 30 minutes standing
outside to hug everyone and say goodbye.
● Sit in car again for approximately 2 hours (less if you live in Tzfat). Most people
should fall asleep in the car.
● Most Importantly: Be together, eat, drink, laugh a lot, love a lot, enjoy the
opportunity we have to be together with who we can, and look forward to being
able to celebrate all together with our wonderful, raucous, amazing extended
family next year!
Missing all of you,
Lisa


A Quarantined Seder - Inconceivable!


Submitted by Moshe


We’re all doing our seder separately this year, a situation that we probably didn’t
imagine we’d be in any time soon, if ever. We’re still coming to grips with the reality of
having to be apart for what is practically the definition of “family time”; having some
members of our family doing seder on their own seems incredibly difficult to accept.
Has such a thing ever happened before? What does our history and Jewish philosophy
have to say about spending seder in seclusion?
The rav of our kehilla, Rav Baruch Weintraub, has mentioned in a number of recent
shiurim that Jewish history is long and global enough to be quite familiar with the need
to quarantine for medical safety. The gemara mentions in multiple locations the wisdom
of isolating to avoid a widespread disease. Even the mishna (e.g. Taanit 3:4) discusses
isolation precautions during time of plague. Though its authors did not understand
germ theory, they understood that sickness is transferred between people and it’s best
to avoid crowds of people who are unwell. The halacha (Tzom Taaniot 2:5) debates the
trade-offs between protecting individuals and protecting society at large.
There is a strong connection to Pesach, as well. We know the history of blood libels in
Europe which kept Jews hiding in their homes just before and during Pesach. But let’s
go all the way back to the original Pesach, the story of the Exodus from Egypt. On the
eve of the last of the 10 plagues, God commanded that Bnei Yisrael prepare for a
special meal which they are to eat in their homes, with their immediate family members,
during the night of the final plague. They are explicitly commanded to stay indoors and
not step out that night:
8 And they shall eat the meat in that night, roast with fire, with unleavened bread and
bitter herbs they shall eat it.
11 And thus shall ye eat it: with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your
staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste--it is the LORD'S passover.
13 And the blood shall serve as a sign on the houses in which ye are; I shall see the
blood and step over you, and there shall no plague be upon you to destroy you, when I
smite the land of Egypt.
14 And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall celebrate it as a festival
dedicated to God; throughout your generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance
for ever.


22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and
touch the lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin; and none of
you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning.
23 For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when He seeth the
blood upon the lintel, and on the two side-posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and
will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
In a reflection of the original circumstances, the halacha is that one must not leave his
home to go visit another during the seder; one must remain with his original seder
group throughout the seder.
Intuitively, the command came to protect the Jews from the terrible events befalling
their captors. They stayed inside in order to keep themselves safe while the Egyptians
were finally broken into submission to God.
Rav Soloveichik insightfully examined this situation inside-out. Rather than understand
the command as intended to protect the Jews, he proposed that on the contrary, it was
to protect the Egyptians.
We have all seen what happens when oppressed people revolt. It’s not a pretty scene,
and one that has been replayed over and over throughout history long ago and in
modern times. Riots. Revenge. Burning, looting, laying waste. Atrocities carried out in
passion, rage, and mobs out of control, attacking those who for so long have been the
powerful oppressor.
What might have happened if the slaves had been unconstrained while their life-long
masters and tormentors were suddenly helpless and vulnerable? Would anyone have
blamed them, had they taken advantage of the moment to slaughter their captors? And
what would have been the resulting self-image and legacy of the nation created at that
moment?
The Egyptians themselves seem to understand this quite well. The story continues:
28 And the children of Israel went and did so; as the LORD had commanded Moses
and Aaron, so did they.
33 And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, to send them out of the land in
haste; for they said: 'We are all dead men.'
36 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let
them have what they asked. And they despoiled the Egyptians.


Note that the above is based on the JPS 1917 translation. Rav Hirsh translates the last
pasuk as:
36 And God had made the Egyptians see that the people were worthy to be given, and
they forestalled their requests and cleared Egypt out.
In Rav Soloveichik’s reading, the nascent nation was commanded to protect itself from
itself. From temptation, from human nature, from carrying out their entirely normal and
rational desires.
Living in quarantine, as unnatural and uncomfortable as it may be, is something we
accept because we all understand that we are protecting ourselves. For those who
have had to stay in even stronger isolation, it must have been difficult to come to terms
with being imprisoned so as to protect someone else - society outside.
Can we extend this perspective to the other “restrictions” “imposed” on us by religion?
The many ways in which Judaism curtails our freedoms and limits our enjoyment of and
engagement with the world - presumably also two-way streets, preventing us not just
from coming to harm, but also from the imprint on our character that would naturally
result from too much partaking in X, time spent on Y, though those activities seem
normal and acceptable to everyone else.
I pray that the current situation improves soon, and that we will all return to spending
time together, in person, as soon as is practical. I hope that our next seder will see us all
together again. In the meantime, hopefully Rav Soleveichik’s explanation can help make
this year’s experience a constructive and meaningful one for us all.


42 It was a night of watching unto the LORD for bringing them out from
the land of Egypt; this same night is a night of watching unto the LORD
for all the children of Israel throughout their generations.


Moshe’s Photo Retrospective - Pesach to Pesach in family activities


Hello Everyone, and Chag Sameach! In light of our separation, I thought it would be fun to show
you how I spent a week of my “quarantine.” If you remember last year, I went on a short, 3-day
hike on the Appalachian Trail. This year, I upped it to 5 1⁄2 days! Overall, I hiked 63 miles, which
is almost double my 32 miles from last year, and It was awesome! You can see on the map, but
I started from a place called Bears Den, which is near Harpers Ferry, West Virginia. I then hiked
along the whole South Mountain ridge until I got to Pen Mar Park, which is on the border with
Pennsylvania! For fun Pesach Trivia, The shortest distance from anywhere in Egypt to the
Israeli border is 201 km, which is just about 125 miles. That means, that if the Jews were able to
walk directly from Mitzraim to Eretz Yisrael, I could make it there in about 10 days! I sure hope
the rest of you could keep up! Even better, if those of you in Tzfat wanted to join the Sambol’s
for the seder, it’s only a 125 km (77 miles) walk! If you are reading this before Pesach, then If
you leave by March 31st, you can make it! If you guys wanted to do the hike, here is a list of
what I brought, so you can copy it!


● Shelter
○ Really light tarp with doors on them to keep the rain out
● Sleeping stuff
○ Hammock (Which I made last year!)
○ Top of a sleeping bag (to cover me in the hammock)
○ Bottom of a sleeping bag (to make sure my butt doesn’t freeze!)
○ An air pillow
● Backpack
○ I was able to fit everything including food into a small 35 Liter backpack, just a
little bit bigger than a big school backpack!


● Food
○ I brought really yummy food and a ton of it! I ate 4000 Calories a day, with my
favorite meal being beans & rice or pesto noodles (both are so good!)


● Miscellaneous
○ Sleeping clothes, a jacket, my headlamp, water bottles, first aid kit, and a whole
bunch of small things


I did so much every day, and I took more pictures than last time, so here are just a few. Also,
because the Pesach book is online this year, I’m including a link to my full list of stuff I brought,
all of my pictures, and an interactive map of my route (It’s not totally accurate because I had to
take a long detour near Harpers Ferry). Also, If you guys remember Ray from my last hike, I met
him again! This time I took a picture, and we were able to hike together again! It was super
crazy, and definitely a one-in-a-million occurrence!


I want to wish you all a Chag Sameach, I hope that next year we will all be able to be together,
and hike in the days of Mashiach!


Links!
Photos: springbreak.matanyaloewenthal.com
Maps: springbreakmap.matanyaloewenthal.com
Pack List: springbreakpacklist.matanyaloewenthal.com


Freedom
Submitted by Ilana


One of the many names of Pesach is החירות חג - the Holiday of Freedom. On Pesach,
we celebrate the first time that the Jewish nation was granted freedom. Unfortunately, it
hasn’t been smooth sailing since then. For many of our ancestors, freedom was
something they could only dream of - it was so distant from the reality they lived in.
Baruch Hashem, we’ve been blessed to live in a time in which we’ve been granted back
our freedom. We’ve had the amazing opportunity to witness the miracle of ציון שיבת.
After living in diaspora for so long, we have returned to our land and can now fight to
defend our own freedom.
This year I’ve joined the armed forces defending the freedom of the Jewish people.
Joining the IDF has been an incredible experience so far, and I’d like to share a small
part.
At the end of basic training, all soldiers declare their loyalty to the country. This
ceremony is called the “השבעה“. During the ceremony each soldier says three texts:
The first text is Hashem’s first command to Yehoshua as he becomes the leader of Bnei
Yisrael, Sefer Yehoshua 1:1-18:
ֶשׁה ַעְבִדּי, ֵמת; וְַע ָתּה קוּם


ֶשׁה ֵלאמֹר. ב מֹ


ֶשׁהֶ--עֶבד ה'; וַיֹּאֶמר ה' ֶאל-יְהוֹ ֻשַׁע ִבּן-נוּן, ְמ ָשֵׁרת מֹ


א וַיְִהי, אֲַחֵרי מוֹת מֹ
ֲעבֹר ֶאתַ-היְַּרֵדּן ַהֶזּה, אַ ָתּה וְָכלָ-הָעם ַהֶזּה, ֶאלָ-האֶָרץ, ֲא ֶשׁר אָנִֹכי נֵֹתן ָלֶהם ִלְבֵני יְִשָׂרֵאל. ג ָכּלָ-מקוֹם, ֲא ֶשׁר ִתְּדרֹךְ
ֶשׁה. ד ֵמַהִמְּדָבּר וְַהְלָּבנוֹן ַהֶזּה וְַעדַ-הָנָּהר ַהָגּדוֹל ְנַהרְ-פָּרת, כֹּל ֶאֶרץ


ַכּףַ-רְגְלֶכם בּוָֹ--לֶכם ְנַתִתּיו: ַכּ ֲא ֶשׁר ִדַּבְּר ִתּי, ֶאל-מֹ


ָך: ַכּ ֲא ֶשׁר ָהיִיִתי


ָך, כֹּל יְֵמי ַחֶיּי


ַהִח ִתּים, וְַעדַ-היָּם ַהָגּדוֹל, ְמבוֹא ַה ָשֶּׁמשׁ--יְִהיֶה, ְגּבוְּלֶכם. ה לֹא-יְִתיֵַצּב ִאישׁ ְלָפֶני
ֶשׁה ֶאְהיֶה ִע ָמּך,ְ לֹא אְַרְפָּך וְלֹא ֶאֶעְזֶבָךּ. ו ֲחַזק, וֱֶאָמץ: ִכּי אַ ָתּה, ַתְּנִחיל ֶאתָ-הָעם ַהֶזּה, ֶאתָ-האֶָרץ,
ִעם-מֹ


ֶשׁה ַעְבִדּי,
ֲא ֶשׁרִ-נ ְשַׁבְּע ִתּי ַל ֲאבוָֹתם ָל ֵתת ָלֶהם. ז ַרק ֲחַזק וֱֶאַמץ ְמאֹד, ִל ְשׁמֹר ַלֲעשׂוֹת ְכָּכלַ-התּוָֹרהֲ--א ֶשׁר ִצוְָּך מֹ
ָך, וְָהִגיָת בּוֹ יוָֹמם


אַלָ-תּסוּר ִמֶמּנּוּ יִָמין וּ ְשׂמֹאול: ְל ַמַען ַתּ ְשִׂכּיל, ְבּכֹל ֲא ֶשׁר ֵתֵּלך.ְ ח לֹא-יָמוּשׁ ֵסֶפר ַהתּוָֹרה ַהֶזּה ִמִפּי


ָך ֲחַזק וֱֶאָמץ,


וַָליְָלה, ְל ַמַען ִתּ ְשׁמֹר ַלֲעשׂוֹת, ְכָּכלַ-הָכּתוּב בּוֹ: ִכּי-אָז ַתְּצִליַח ֶאתְ-דָּרֶכָך, וְאָז ַתּ ְשִׂכּיל. ט ֲהלוֹא ִצוִּיִתי


ָך, ְבּכֹל ֲא ֶשׁר ֵתֵּלך.ְ {פ}


אַלַ-תֲּערֹץ וְאַלֵ-תָּחת: ִכּי ִע ְמָּך ה' ֱאלֹקי


ְטֵרי ָהָעם ֵלאמֹר. יא ִעְברוּ ְבֶּקֶרב ַהַמֲּחֶנה, וְַצוּוּ ֶאתָ-הָעם ֵלאמֹר, ָהִכינוּ ָלֶכם, ֵציָדה: ִכּי ְבּעוֹד


י וַיְַצו יְהוֹ ֻשַׁע, ֶאת-שֹׁ
ֶשׁת יִָמים, אֶַתּם עְֹבִרים ֶאתַ-היְַּרֵדּן ַהֶזּה, ָלבוֹא ָלֶר ֶשׁת ֶאתָ-האֶָרץ, ֲא ֶשׁר ה' ֱאלֹקיֶכם נֵֹתן ָלֶכם ְלִר ְשָׁתּהּ. {פ}
ְשׁלֹ


ֶשׁה ֶעֶבד-ה',


יב וְָלראוֵּבִני, וְַלָגִּדי, וְַל ֲחִצי, ֵשֶׁבט ַהְמַנֶשּׁה--אַָמר יְהוֹ ֻשַׁע, ֵלאמֹר. יג ָזכוֹר, ֶאתַ-הָדָּבר, ֲא ֶשׁר ִצוָּה ֶא ְתֶכם מֹ
ֵלאמֹר: ה' ֱאלֹקיֶכם ֵמִניַח ָלֶכם, וְָנַתן ָלֶכם ֶאתָ-האֶָרץ ַהזֹּאת. יד ְנֵשׁיֶכם ַטְפֶּכם, וִּמְקֵניֶכם, יֵ ְשׁבוּ, ָבּאֶָרץ ֲא ֶשׁר ָנַתן ָלֶכם
ֶשׁה ְבֵּעֶבר ַהיְַּרֵדּן; וְאֶַתּם ַתַּעְברוּ ֲחֻמ ִשׁים ִלְפֵני ֲאֵחיֶכם, כֹּל ִגּבּוֵֹרי ַהַחיִל, וֲַעַזְרֶתּם, אוָֹתם. טו ַעד ֲא ֶשׁר-יִָניַח ה'
מֹ
ַל ֲאֵחיֶכם, ָכֶּכם, וְיְָרשׁוּ ַגםֵ-הָמּה, ֶאתָ-האֶָרץ ֲא ֶשׁר-ה' ֱאלֹקיֶכם נֵֹתן ָלֶהם; וְַשְׁבֶתּם ְלֶאֶרץ יְֻר ַשְּׁתֶכם, וִיִר ְשֶׁתּם אוָֹתהּ, ֲא ֶשׁר
ֶשׁה ֶעֶבד ה', ְבֵּעֶבר ַהיְַּרֵדּן ִמְזַרח ַה ָשֶּׁמשׁ. טז וַיֲַּענוּ, ֶאת-יְהוֹ ֻשַׁע ֵלאמֹר: כֹּל ֲא ֶשׁרִ-צוִּיָתנוּ ַנֲע ֶשׂה,
ָנַתן ָלֶכם מֹ


ָך, ִע ָמּך,ְ ַכּ ֲא ֶשׁר ָהיָה,


ָך: ַרק יְִהיֶה ה' ֱאלֹקי


ֶשׁה, ֵכּן ִנ ְשַׁמע ֵאֶלי


וְֶאלָ-כּלֲ-א ֶשׁר ִתּ ְשָׁלֵחנוּ ֵנֵלך.ְ יז ְכּכֹל ֲא ֶשׁר- ָשַׁמְענוּ ֶאל-מֹ


ָך ְלכֹל ֲא ֶשׁרְ-תַּצֶוּנּוּ--יוָּמת: ַרק, ֲחַזק וֱֶאָמץ. {פ}


ָך, וְלֹא-יְִשַׁמע ֶאתְ-דָּבֶרי


ֶשׁה. יח ָכּלִ-אישׁ ֲא ֶשׁר-יְַמֶרה ֶאתִ-פּי
ִעם-מֹ


From the start of Sefer Yehoshua, with some rewording for brevity:
The Lord said to Joshua:
“Arise, cross this Jordan, you and all this nation, to the land which I give the children of
Israel. Every place on which the soles of your feet will tread I have given to you, as I
have spoken to Moses. As I was with Moses so shall I be with you. I will not weaken My
grasp on you nor will I abandon you. Be strong and have courage, for you will cause this
nation to inherit the land that I have sworn to their ancestors to give to them. Just be
strong and very courageous to observe and do in accordance with all of the Torah that
Moses My servant has commanded you. Be strong and have courage; do not fear and
do not be dismayed; for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go.”
And [the people] answered Joshua, saying “all that you have commanded us we shall
do, and wherever you send us we shall go. Just as we obeyed Moses in everything, so
shall we obey you; only that the Lord your God be with you, as He was with Moses.
Only be strong and have courage.”
The second text is a personal declaration:
הנני מצהירה ומתחייבת בהן צדקי לשמור אמונים למדינת ישראל, לחוקיה ולשלטונותיה המוסמכים,
לקבל על עצמי ללא תנאי וללא סייג עול משמעתו של צבא ההגנה לישראל, לציית לכל הפקודות
וההוראות הניתנות על ידי המפקדים המוסמכים ולהקדיש כל כוחותיי ואף להקריב את חיי להגנת
המולדת ולחירות ישראל.
“I hereby declare and undertake my duty to uphold allegiance to the State of Israel, its
laws, and its authorities; to accept unconditionally and unreservedly the authority of the
Israel Defense Forces; to obey all the orders and instructions given by the commanders;
and to devote all my powers and even sacrifice my life for the protection of the
homeland and the freedom of Israel.”
And the third text is HaTikvah:


כל עוד בלבב פנימה
נפש יהודי הומייה,
ולפאתי מזרח קדימה
עין לציון צופייה;
עוד לא אבדה תקותנו,
התקווה בת שנות אלפיים,
להיות עם חופשי בארצנו
ארץ ציון וירושלים.


I feel very blessed to be able to take part in defending our freedom, and I think that
Pesach is a good opportunity to remember to appreciate and give thanks for our
freedom in the present as well.
Another experience that I’m very grateful to have had is the year I spent at midrasha.
During my year at midrasha I learned a whole bunch of abbreviations. It was tough
constantly having to look up abbreviations I couldn’t remember or wasn’t familiar with,
but towards the end of the year I think I finally started getting the hang of it.
Unfortunately, that hasn’t helped me much in the army, since many of the abbreviations
I learned at midrasha mean something completely different in army context. For
example:


- ע"ע - עבד עברי או עבודה עצמאית?
- ר"צ - רבי צדוק או ראש צוות?
- ת"ש - תא שמע או תנאי שירות?
- ש"צ - שליח ציבור או שתוק צעיר?
- מ"כ - מתנות כהונה או מפקד כיתה?
- חדא - אחד או חדר אוכל?
- מד"ס - מדברי סופרים או מדי ספורט?
- ג"ג - גוי גמור או גבולות גזרה?
It’s kind of entertaining trying to find parallels between the abbreviations in the
two different environments, and it’s even more entertaining when you use the unfamiliar
meaning in the current context ;) For example; when we’re asked “Can everyone
identify the GimelGimel standing next to the Mak in Madas?” it takes a minute to
untangle whether I’m looking for a goy or a barrel next to a commander in shorts or a
kehuna gift מדרבנן...


Things I ate to get ready for Pesach: (by Daina)


Pizza


Calzone
Pizza


Pasta with tomato sauce
Pizza


Lasagna
Pizza


Bread with fresh mozzarella and tomato
Pizza


Grilled cheese sandwich with tomato soup
Pizza


Wacky Mac with diced tomatoes
Pizza


Spaghetti and meatballs
Pizza


Sloppy joes
Pizza


Now I must give credit where credit is due, Zaelig did help me eat all of this. Here is a picture of


him in case you forgot what he looks like,
If any of you would like to reward us for this feat, we are willing to accept donations of cash or
an apartment in Washington Heights.
Thank you,
Daina and Zaelig


Why are there four words of redemption?


Submitted by Mordechai


The number four is clearly a key number in Leil haseder. We have four cups of wine,
four questions, four sons, and four כזיתים of Matzah that we are supposed to eat. In
addition, one of the main parts of Maggid revolves around four psukim, starting with “
.(26:5-8 Deuteronomy” (ובמורא גדול ובאותות ובמופתים” with ending and” ארמי אובד אבי
The basis for the importance of the number four is explained in the Yerushalmi Gemara
(א עמוד י דף (פסחים מסכת, where it says that we have four cups to symbolise four words
והוצאתי, והצלתי, וגאלתי, ולקחתי :redemption of
But why are there specifically four words of redemption?
I’d like to propose that in fact, the whole story of the Exodus revolves around the
number four:
● First, We have four parshiot that talk about the Exodus - בשלח ,בא ,וארא ,שמות.
● Second, we know of four generations who lived in Egypt, at least in Moshe’s
family (if we don’t count Ya’akov who only came to Egypt near the end of his life)
.לוי, קהת, עמרם, משה -
● Third, there are four decrees that we hear Pharoah making against Bnei Israel: 1.
Slave work, 2. Killing the sons by the two midwives, 3. Throwing the sons into the
nile, 4. Not giving Bnei Israel straw for making bricks.
● Fourth, many years beforehand G-d told Avraham that his descendants would
spend 400 years in Egypt.
● Fifth, four of G-d’s names appear during the Exodus:


אלוקים (ב:כד), י-ק-ו-ק (ג:ז), אהיה - אשר - אהיה (ג:יד), ש-ד-י (ו:ג)
● Sixth, Bnei Israel’s crying out to G-d during their slavery is expressed using four
different verbs:


”...ויאנחו בני ישראל מן העבודה, ויזעקו, ותעל שועתם ... וישמע אלוקים את נאקתם..." (שמות
ב:כג-כד)


And G-d hears them with four verbs:
”וישמע אלוקים ... ויזכור אלוקים ... וירא אלוקים ... וידע אלוקים." (שמות ב:כד-כה)
And speaking of those psukim, I’ll point out that it says that when G-d heard their
cries he remembered four things:


”...ויזכור אלוקים את בריתו את אברהם את יצחק ואת יעקב." (שמות ב:כד)
● Seventh, when G-d speaks to Moshe from within the bush he introduces himself
as:


”... אלוקי אביך אלוקי אברהם אלוקי יצחק ואלוקי יעקב..." (שמות ג:ו)
And that is also how he tells Moshe to “introduce” him to Bnei Israel, (טו:ג שמות(.
So, it seems like the number four is really a significant theme within the story of the
Exodus. It especially seems to come up regarding the relationship between us and G-d
(In the last four examples above) and even more specifically - it comes up very clearly
with relation to our three אבות) and once we think of them, we can’t forget our four
.(אמהות


I’d like to point out something interesting here - the אבות show up repeatedly in these
sets of four, but as there are only three of them, each time they are “joined” by
something else. In the sixth example, (כד:ב שמות(, that’s the ברית that G-d made with
Avraham and with all of his descendants. In the seventh example, that’s “אביך“, which
seems to refer to Moshe’s father, but for some reason doesn’t specify his name. As
such, this pasuk could apply to each and every one of us - G-d is the G-d of our
fathers, and of Avraham, Yitschak and Ya’akov.


So maybe the number four represents this - G-d’s relationship with Avraham, with
Yitschak, with Ya’akov, and with you.


From the psukim I brought earlier - and also from the Zohar (No, I haven’t actually been
studying the Zohar. I’ve simply heard about this specific part.), which talks about Bnei
Israel having reached the 49 gates of טומאה) impurity) in Egypt - it seems like G-d took
us out of Egypt because he remembered his promises to our forefathers, not
necessarily because we earned it. But, we only have three forefathers, and the number
we focus on during Leil Haseder is four. I’m proposing that we are supposed to be
number four. We, too, can and should be part of the equation, part of our relationship
with G-d. We shouldn’t just rely on G-d’s favor because of our forefathers’ good deeds,
but rather we should each think about what our part is in our personal and national
relationship with G-d. Maybe that’s why G-d waited for Bnei Israel to cry to him before
he brought them out of Egypt. Because we are supposed to take a part in our
relationship with G-d. And now we have 49 days to work on that, both as individuals and
as a nation, as we build our way up to getting the Torah.


Wishing you all a happy Peasach and sending lots of love,
Mordechai


Hello family!!
This year has been quite the rollercoaster for me.
I honestly feel pretty accomplished in myself. Not only did I begrudgingly move my
entire life across the world I also learned how to grow despite it. I made many lifelong
friends and I also grew so much closer to all of you! I hope that I can continue out this
year in Israel but sadly it doesn't look too promising. I also have no clue what my plans
for next year will be, but I am trying my best to keep an open mind. I wish we could all
be together for seder but for now know that I am thinking and sending my love to all of
you.
Love,
Ellie


Aharon’s Garage Painting Project


So as you probably know my parents are a little loony. Anyway last year I didn't have anything
to do in the summer break sooooooo they decided I should paint the garage walls... Why?!?
Obviously after some convincing (because it took a while to really believe that they were
serious), I didn't say no. Here's the process from start to finish:
Step 1: Design characters!


I decided that each family member should get to have a character of their own so I asked
them to sketch one for me. Unfortunately I can't find the picture of the character that Mordechai
did, but you can see it in step 7 below, the guy with the colored eyes at the bottom left. And
Abba did not make a character of his own.


Step 3: Draw the good ones!


Step 4: Arrange them (and minor changes)!


OK, so far all of that was on paper and on the computer. Now I needed to get it onto the garage
wall.


It took some thought to figure out how to get this drawing onto the garage wall. Then we came
up with the idea of:
Step 5: Project the sketch onto the wall and trace the characters onto the wall! (sorry it was
hard to take a pic of that)
Step 6: Paint the outline (this was a mistake I should have done the color first)


Step 7: Color them in! (Here and there I also allowed some members of the family to help out)


Step 8: Next wall!


And that’s it! If you haven’t seen it in person, come visit some time!
Happy Pesach,
Aharon Sambol :)


42 Things to do When


a Worldwide Deadly Virus is Taking Over


Humanity


and Forcing Everyone to Stay Inside
Our Homes with ONLY Our Family


or


If You are Bored
by Ashira
💥🌎💥


1. Stand on your head.
2. Read a book
3. Watch a movie
4. Don’t eat for a while, that way you can accomplish the next steps
5. Go to the kitchen
6. Open the refrigerator and stare into it for a while
7. Close the refrigerator
8. Open the refrigerator
9. Look in the fridge to try to figure out what to eat
10. Realize that you don’t keep pretzels in the fridge
11. Find the pretzels
12. Eat them if you are still hungry
13. Plant a tree
14. Clean your room
15. Wait at least 10 seconds for your room to go back to normal
16. Eat cheese
17. Cook something if your mom isn’t still mad at you for making everything trief or burning
the kitchen
18. Do homework (just kidding)
19. See how much water you can drink in a minute
20. Do an art project (if you need an idea for one call Bubby 052-322-6355)


21. Go somewhere really quiet and try to hear the silence
22. Pick leaves off of trees
23. Do your laundry
24. Do someone else’s laundry
25. Organize all the books in your house by color
26. 👻💣💤👊🙊🔮💍💰👑😍👀👽😂⏳🎡🎻
27. Don’t 👻💣💤👊🙊🔮💍💰👑😍👀👽😂⏳🎡🎻
28. Get a haircut from the least trusted person you know
29. Open the fridge
30. Lay down in the sun and absorb vitamin D
31. Make a fort (not a fart)
32. Become the ruler of the world
33. Put on a coat. Take an umbrella. Turn on the shower and pretend it’s raining.
34. Invite your family to join you.
35. If you want to know what # 35 is, send Ashira a video of you saying that Ashira is the
ruler of the world and Ashira will tell you.
36. Close the fridge
37. Play a game
38. Call your friends or family or a random number of one of the magnets on your fridge
39. Sleep
40. Nothing
41. Read a list of: 42 Things to do When a Worldwide Deadly Virus
is Taking Over Humanity and Forcing Everyone to
Stay Inside Our Homes with ONLY Our Family


or
If You are Bored
by
Ashira


42. Repeat 🔄


Matza-man
By: Hillel Loewenthal


Intro


It was a stormy Passover night and a man named Bob was on his roof eating matza and
suddenly a lightning bolt struck him and he fell off the roof to
the ground unconscious with new matza powers...
Chapter one


The next morning:
Bob woke up in the hospital and surprisingly he felt better then ever in his life the doctors
said all his vitals are stable and they added that a fall from the height of his roof should have
been deadly but not even one bone in his body was broken and they said to him that he can
leave now if he wants to. “Ok” he replied and left the hospital...


Chapter two


On the way back to his home:
He was walking down the street when two muggers pushed him into a dark alley and one of
them took out a knife and told him to give him his money he told them that he doesn’t have
any money. The mugger put his knife up and Bob put up his hands up and matza-stars shot
out of his hands and hit the muggers in the face and they fell to the ground in a thud and Bob
ran to his house...


Chapter three


At Bobs house:
Bob was siting at his table and thinking that what happened was not real that he shot
matza-stars out of his hands so to be sure that it is not a dream he put up his hands and
matza-stars shot out of his hands and stuck in to the wall he got up and pulled a matza-star
out of the wall and at that moment he swore to do only good with his powers...


Chapter four


Three weeks later:
Matza-man ran into the bank and shot matza-stars at three bank-robbers who fell to
the floor then Matza-man shot sticky matza dough at two others that stuck to the
walls. He told all the people to get out of the bank while he goes to the vault. He
stepped into the vault and there were four other bank-robbers putting money into
duffel bags. One of them saw Matza-man coming and shot him with a
semi-automatic rifle but Matza-man simply crossed his arms and a matza-shield
blocked the bullets. Then he shot at them matza-stars but they picked up a
chametz-shield and the matza-stars bounced off it and hit Matza-man in the head.
He fell to the floor but quickly recovered and jumped over the chametz-shield in a
flip and landed behind them in a roll. Then he punched one in the stomach and
tripped two others then jumped high over them and shot all four of them with
sticky matza dough. Then the cops came in and took care of the rest. When
Matza-man stepped out of the bank everybody cheered...


Epilogue


Matza-man continued to save the city from evil people and especially from the
group called “The Chametz Guys”. Matza-man earned several “metals of honor”
for saving many people and if you haven’t guessed who Matza-man is...


well to bad for you!


The End...


How I Feel about the stupid Karona virus
I feel that the karona virus is so stupid because why did it need to come
now before פסח so that I can't have רמות salad for this year? And I'll need
to now wait till next year, and why did it need to come now when scientists
still don't have a cure.


If I had a superpower it would be to obliviate things so that this year I could
be with my whole family and have רמות salad. Now if you're wondering, in
addition to the other good things I wrote about in my other entry, I'm basically
just being bored and moaning and walking around with my pyjamas and
learning the Homework from school...


Well, one other exciting thing that I'm doing is, I already told you about
learning to bicycle ride, but that’s not the only exercise I’m doing... I also,
almost every day, exercise with Abba or Mama and Yaya. And it might
not be exciting, but I like helping to clean and prepare for Pesach,
especially when we’re baking and making other yummy food.
I wish you all have good yummy food too and we’ll miss you this time but
see you next time!


Love,
Avigayil Sambol


Submitted by Emma


Pesach, Matzah and Maror


by


Ohevya Shmuel Loewenthal


I learned in the mishna Pesachim that Raban Gamliel says that there are three important parts of
the seder.
1. Pesach
2. Matzah
3. Maror
Pesach: because God passed over us during makat bechorot.
Matzah: because the Egyptians made us leave in a hurry so our dough didn’t rise.
Maror: because the Egyptians made our lives so miserable.
I also learned that we always need to remember that God took us out of Egypt in the past and
also God is taking us out of Egypt today (the troubles in the world) and bringing us to Geulah.
I am so sad that we are not having Pesach together this year.
Today maybe the three things relate to:
1. Pesach: that God will have the corona pass over us safely.
2. Matzah: that it will happen quickly.
3. Maror: remembering all the troubles we went through.
I hope that the corona will stop and that we will be able to be together soon.
Love
Ohevya